Dmitri Shostakovich

A life of music in the Soviet regime.

1906 Born in Saint Petersburg, Russia.

1919 Admitted to the Petrograd Conservatory, where he studied piano, composition, counterpoint, and fugue, as well as music history.

1926 The premiere of his First Symphony, which led to his notice by Mikhail Tukhachevsky, who helped him find a place to live in Moscow.

1927 Honorable Mention at the First International Chopin Piano Competition in Warsaw. Later went on to compose his Second Symphony.

1929 His satirical opera, The Nose, is viciously criticized by the Russian Association of Proletarian Musicians. Its premiere the following year receives poor critical reception.

1932 Married Nina Varzar.

1934 Opera Lady Macbeth of the Mtensk District premiered to critical acclaim, notably from socialist party officials as well as the general public.

1936 Pravda publishes a scathing review of Lady Macbeth of the Mtensk District following a performance attended by Joseph Stalin. Following this, several publications retracted prior praise for the work. Several musicians went on to denounce Shostakovich, though some composers continued to voice support for him, despite his widespread infamy. He withdrew the premiere of his Fourth Symphony at the end of that year.

1937 His Fifth Symphony, a more conservative work, premieres to wide critical acclaim, restoring his public standing. He goes on to teach composition at the Leningrad Conservatory.

1941-43 Composes Seventh Symphony mainly in Leningrad before evacuating. By the time Shostakovich and his family arrive back in Moscow, his Eighth Symphony receives criticism for its somber tone, despite the Red Army's recent victories against Germany.

1948 The Zhadnov Decree is issued, denouncing many composers, including Shostakovich, for formalism and western influence in their music. He was subsequently dismissed from the Leningrad Conservatory.

1949 Shostakovich attends the Cultural and Scientific Congress for World Peace in New York City as a represntative of the Soviet Union, and is pressured into publicly denouncing Stravinsky, one of his biggest influences.

1953 Upon Stalin's death, Shostakovich composed his Tenth Symphony. He also premiered many works composed during his denunciation.

1954 His first wife, Nina Varzar, passes away.

1956 He marries Margarita Kainova, whom he divorces within three years.

1960 He officially joins the Communist Party, and is subsequently made General Secretary of the Composer's Union. Subsequently composes Twelfth Symphony as a tribute to the Bolshevik Revolution. However, friends report his severe depression and considerable poor health during his period of involvement in the Party. He composes his Eighth String Quartet in just 3 days, which he dedicated "to the victims of fascism and war". 

1962 He marries Irina Supinskaya. He also composes his Thirteenth Symphony, which incorporated controversial poems by Yevgeny Yevtushenko, which touch upon the massacre of Ukrainian Jews.

1965 He publicly defends Joseph Brodsky, a poet who was exiled. His protest, along with the protests of other Soviet artists, led to Brodsky's commutation, and subsequent return to Leningrad. His health had been deteriorating and he was diagnosed with poliomyelitis.

1969 He dedicates his Fourteenth Symphony to Benjamin Britten.

1975 Shostakovich dies of lung cancer, and is interred at Novodevichy Cemetery in Moscow.




